Clement Nnachi, Abakaliki  No fewer than 26 persons sustained various degrees of injury in a multiple road accident at the Idodo end of the Enugu-Abakaliki Expressway on Sunday.
It was gathered that the accident involved two commercial buses.
Eyewitnesses said the driver of one of the buses – an 18-seater bus with number plate, ABL 633 YU, en route from Abakaliki to Enugu – tried to escape from a police checkpoint at the boundary between Enugu and Ebonyi states.
The bus was said to have run into a Hiace bus marked, 452 YP, coming from Enugu to Abakaliki.
When our correspondent visited the scene, the two damaged vehicles were seen, just as sympathisers were busy rescuing trapped victims.
An eyewitness, Reverend Father Stephen Nnorun of Catholic Diocese of Manfi in the Republic of Cameroon, said the cause of the accident was lack of patience on the part of the driver, who refused to stop at the police checkpoint.
He said, “More than 26 persons were injured and there was no vehicle to convey them to a hospital.
The police later stopped a few vehicles to help the victims.”
Two other witnesses, Chinonso Okeke and Ifeanyi Igwe, blamed the police for mounting the checkpoint, which they said was responsible for the accident.
Igwe said, “One of the bus drivers was trying to dodge the policemen who tried to stop him, not knowing that there was a vehicle approaching with speed.”
A Federal Road Safety Special Marshal, Mr Max Nnaji , who assisted in the rescue effort, said the accident was caused by the checkpoint mounted by the police.
He, however, urged motorists to always apply caution while plying highways.
He said, “I attribute that accident to the recklessness of the driver; and secondly, to the way and manner the policemen mounted a roadblock on the highway.”
Officials of the Federal Road Safety Corps were also on the ground and assisted in rescuing the injured persons.
The Enugu State Police Public Relations Officer, ASP Ebere Amaraizu, could not be reached on the telephone.
Copyright PUNCH.
All rights reserved.
This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.
Contact: [email protected]  (Visited 214 times, 216 visits today).
