Punjab Examination Commission (PEC) will announce 8th class result on March 31, 2017.
PEC 8th class result 2017 will be available here at 10 A.M.  Punjab Examination Commission is responsible of assessing the primary and middle class student by taking their exams all over the Punjab.
The commission takes these exams every year and announces their results.
This year, too, the 5th class and 8th class exams were held in first and second week of February respectively.
According to official announcement of Punjab Examination Commission, the result of both classes will be announced on March 31, 2017.
Punjab Examination Commission (PEC) started functioning in 2005 and in 2006 conducted 5th grade population examination for the first time in the Province.
Now PEC is a statutory body working under Punjab Examination Commission Act XI of 2010.
The commission aims to assess the ability of students to reach at some conclusion, which further can help policy makers to access their policies’ success.
At the same time, it faces huge allegations of unnecessary expenditures, loopholes in examination process and setting up papers beyond the ability of students.
This year, one billion rupees were said to be spent on 5th and 8th class exams in Punjab, while all students taking part in exams will be considered passed.
The private school students are exempted to participate in these exams.
Such policies clearly show that all the process is to access the public school teachers’ performance not the ability of students.
The teachers, on the other hand, try to help students cheat by hook or crock to avoid the punishments decided by Punjab government for bad performance.
However, The Punjab Examination Commission PEC 8th class result 2017 will be available at 10 A.M at Official website of PEC as well as at Lahore Dispatch.
Punjab Examination commission’s official website might face problem in handling queries of students on result date.
So you can wait for some time or go for gazette to see the result.
