Some of the UK’s top Paralympic stars have been warned they could be reclassified ahead of a key parliamentary hearing into claims that some athletes have exaggerated their disabilities to boost their chances of winning a medal.
World Para Athletics, the international federation for Para athletics, has announced that amendments to the classification rules and regulations are being made for athletes internationally in a variety of classes.
With changes focused on athletes with cerebral palsy, stroke and multiple sclerosis as well as those with lower limb blades, a wide range of British competitors including Kadeena Cox, Hannah Cockroft and Paul Blake are among those being asked to submit to a new assessment.
Paula Dunn, the Para athletics head coach at UK Athletics, sent an email to British athletes affected telling them: “There is no need to be concerned but please follow the below direction and return all completed documentation asap.”
The World Para Athletics instruction acknowledged that the change would “result in a great deal of work” but said that it was “essential to preserve the integrity of World Para Athletics competitions”.
Concerns over the integrity of the classification system have prompted the digital, culture, media, and sport select committee to hear evidence on the subject on Tuesday as part of its inquiry into sport governance.
The parliamentary hearing follows complaints in the run-up to the Rio games that deliberate misrepresentation of the extent of athletes’ impairments was affecting the integrity of the sport, with some critics comparing it to drug use in able-bodied sport.
Those warnings prompted UK Athletics to announce a review.
The select committee said that it would “examine whether the current system of classification in British Para athletics is fair” after “allegations of cheating, abuse and interference have since rocked a number of Paralympic disciplines”.
It will take evidence from key figures in Paralympic sport including Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson and Tim Hollingsworth, CEO of the British Paralympic Association (BPA).
It will also hear from Michael Breen, father of Paralympian Olivia Breen, a vocal critic of the system.
Paralympic athletes are observed on and off track by assessors, with medical records also playing a key part in the decision about which class athletes should go into.
The new assessments will toughen the demands made of competitors by asking their doctors to fill in a new medical diagnostics form that will require recent medical documentation supporting athletes’ diagnoses.
Classes of competitors affected by the new assessments include the T30s – athletes with cerebral palsy, stroke and multiple sclerosis – as well as the T42-44 class who use lower limb blades.
Other successful Paralympians among those who will be asked to submit to new assessments include Toby Gold, Graeme Ballard and Jonnie Peacock.
Ahead of the scrutiny of the select committee, Hollingsworth used a blog post to acknowledge some failings in Paralympic classification.
Noting that classification is primarily the preserve of the separate governing bodies for each sport rather than the BPA, he added that “intentional misrepresentation is one of the biggest risks to the integrity of Paralympic sport” and acknowledged that there was a need to “strengthen and improve” the classification process.
But Michael Breen questioned the timing of both the planned review of classifications of athletes and the BPA blog, saying: “I think it’s an insincere attempt at the 59th minute of the eleventh hour to show that they are actually prepared to do something ... Without dealing with classification as a global issue simply agreeing to reclassification by the same classifiers is meaningless.”
.
